deployment: adds content (#28)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2: deployment/deploying-to-heroku.md

# Deploying to Heroku

## Goal

Our goal is to show the process of deploying a Flask API to Heroku.

### Intro to Heroku

> [Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/home) is one Platform as a Service (PaaS). We can use Heroku services to deploy our Flask API. After we successfully deploy, our API will be available to all web clients!

Reviewer: a little more exciting?
```suggestion
[Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/home) is one Platform as a Service (PaaS). We can use Heroku services to deploy our Flask API. After we successfully deploy, our API will be available to the whole Internet!
```

- It uses Git as part of its development workflow

## Format

This lesson will outline the following steps in order to do an initial deploy to Heroku:

1. Create a Heroku account and get access to the Heroku CLI
1. Configure our Flask project for Heroku
1. Commit our new configurations
1. Create a Heroku app via the CLI
1. Push code to the Heroku remote
1. Create a database in Heroku via the CLI
1. Set the environment variables for Heroku
1. Setup and initialize the database in Heroku via the CLI
1. Verify

Then, we will cover these topics on continuous deployment to Heroku:

1. Updating the Heroku remote in our development workflow
1. General Heroku tools
1. General Heroku debugging strategies

### !callout-danger

## Read-through First, Repeat Second

We **highly suggest** reading or watching through this lesson fully, before repeating on your own machine.

### !end-callout

### !callout-danger

## Prioritize Familiarity

It may be better to think about this lesson as a resource to be familiar with, rather than committing all the new knowledge to memory at once.

### !end-callout

## Create a Heroku Account

Create an account on [Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/home).

> After logging into the dashboard, we should see an empty list of Heroku apps. (This screenshot features one Heroku app).

Reviewer: a bit more of an explanation about why the screenshot isn't showing an empty list
```suggestion
After logging into the dashboard, as a new user we should see an empty list of Heroku apps. (This screenshot is from an account which had already created one Heroku app).
```

![Screenshot of the Heroku Dashboard with one app listed in it](../assets/deployment/deployment_heroku-bare-dashboard.png)

### Get the Heroku CLI

The Heroku CLI will allow us to run powerful commands to manage our Heroku apps from our command line! We'll use the CLI to create and manage our deployed projects.

Follow the directions to install [the Heroku CLI](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli):

```bash
$ brew tap heroku/brew && brew install heroku
```

> 

Reviewer: provide an explanation of what this command does
```suggestion

This command runs two separate commands. The `&&` joins them into one convenient copy/paste-able unit.

The first command `brew tap heroku/brew` tells Homebrew to add an additional source of software packages (termed a _tap_ in Homebrew-speak). The second command `brew install heroku` uses Homebrew to install the Heroku CLI, which it will be able to find with the tap we just configured.

```

### Log In to the Heroku CLI

The Heroku CLI needs to authenticate our user account. Follow the directions to [log into the Heroku CLI](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli#getting-started):

```bash
$ heroku login
```

> We'll be prompted to enter any key to go to the web browser to complete login. The CLI will then log us in automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll be prompted to press any key to go to a web browser to complete our login. The CLI will then log us in automatically.
```

## Configure Our Flask App for Heroku

Although Heroku will do a lot of the work of hosting, running, and maintaining our API server, we need to add a small amount of configuration to our project.

### Check Dependencies for `gunicorn`

> We will need to depend on a Python package named [gunicorn](https://pypi.org/project/gunicorn/).

Reviewer: need to depend on sounds awkward. we are taking gunicorn as a dependency, yes, but let's just say that we're going to use it (and very briefly what for)
```suggestion
We will use a Python package named [gunicorn](https://pypi.org/project/gunicorn/) to launch our Flask API on Heroku.

`gunicorn` is capable of running Flask apps so that they can handle multiple simultaneous requests, which is very important for production web applications.
```

> Confirm that the package `gunicorn` is in the project's `requirements.txt` file.

Reviewer: we do instead of an order
```suggestion
We should confirm that the package `gunicorn` is in the project's `requirements.txt` file.
```

> 

Reviewer: Provide guidance on what top do if it's missing (it shouldn't be, and we've done this once before for a different package, but it doesn't hurt to review the steps again)
no suggestion because code
following comment contains markdown

Reviewer: If `gunicorn` does _not_ appear in our `requirement.txt`, we can add it by installing it locally with:

```bash
(venv) $ pip install gunicorn
```

After it has installed, we can update our `requirements.txt` by running:

```bash
(venv) $ pip freeze > requirements.txt
```

Heroku makes use of our `requirements.txt` file to install our app dependencies, so it is very important to ensure that all of our dependencies are properly listed.

If we needed to update our `requirements.txt`, we should be sure to add and commit this change.

Reviewer 2: Very soft suggestion: I wonder if it'd be less noisy in this case to just say if something didn't work, one of the above steps in this less wasn't performed properly and suggest they try to redo those commands. Feel free to ignore this if you disagree.

Author: @jmaddox19 Good suggestion! When I previewed this, it didn't feel like too much extra bloat, so I decided to go with the previous suggestion, but I would probably do exactly what you said if we felt like it were too long!!

Author: Hmm. I'm looking at this again, and I'm happy to turn this into a "callout" if that feels better, too.

<img width="1440" alt="Screen Shot 2021-04-29 at 1 49 58 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30602862/116616858-0555e780-a8f2-11eb-8919-90a401b6309f.png">
<img width="1440" alt="Screen Shot 2021-04-29 at 1 51 24 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30602862/116616863-071fab00-a8f2-11eb-9a0b-773efd5cc525.png">

Author: For the sake of moving forward with this PR (and since all of these were soft suggestions), I went with the original suggestion, but I'm super open to bringing this back in too (since now that I re-look at it, the section here is a bit long and I understand Jared's point)!

Reviewer: The callout looks nice. But one thing is that if we did that, then the passage after "Heroku makes use of..." that talks about pushing the change to requirements.txt should also be a part of the callout. But since you went with the original, I guess this comment is pointless. 😂 

Honestly, gunicorn _should_ be in the requirements. You put it in the requirements. It would only not be there if they removed it. But since the text said to confirm it was there, it sort of begs the "but what if it isn't?" And we haven't really given much discussion to updating requirements.txt, but it would be nice if students got used to the idea, so it seemed a reasonable thing to add. 🤷

### Create a Procfile for Heroku

[`Procfile`](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/procfile) is a file specifically used in codebases deployed on Heroku.

> We define web server processes Heroku needs to run inside the Procfile. We'll use our Procfile to define how to start a Flask web server.

Reviewer: I doubt the reader will understand what it means to define a web server process. just say why we're using it: we need it to define how to start the server
```suggestion
We'll use our Procfile to define how to start our Flask web server.
```

First, create a `Procfile` inside the project root. This file _must be named exactly `Procfile`, **with no file extension**_.

```bash
$ touch Procfile
```

Then, fill the Procfile with this content:

```
web: gunicorn 'app:create_app()'
```

## Commit

> Save this file. Then, create a git commit that contains this change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Save this file. Then, create a Git commit that contains this change.
```

## Create a Heroku App

For each project we deploy, we will need to create and manage a Heroku app. Our Heroku app will give us visibility, access, and tools to manage our deployed app.

> After `cd`ing to our project root, we can create a Heroku app using the Heroku CLI. In the command line using **either** of these options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After `cd`ing to our project root, we can create a Heroku app using the Heroku CLI. From the command line we should pick **either** of these options:
```

1. We can create a Heroku app with an automatically generated app name using:

```bash
$ heroku create
```

2. We can create our app with the name `your-app-name` using:

```bash
$ heroku create your-app-name
```

> Replace `your-app-name` with the name of the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `your-app-name` with the desired name of the app.
```

![Screenshot of the terminal after running the command "heroku create hello-books-api"](../assets/deployment/deployment_heroku-cli-create.png)

> 

Reviewer: include a warning about unique names
```suggestion

Note that the app name must be unique across all Heroku apps, not just our own apps. As a result, the name `hello-books-api` is already taken, as it was used in this walk-through!

We will need to come up with our own name that has a unique touch, or we can simply use the nameless option to generate a unique name automatically.

```

Author: Nitpicking: Could we put this into one paragraph?

```suggestion

Note that the app name must be unique across all Heroku apps, not just our own apps. As a result, the name `hello-books-api` is already taken, as it was used in this walk-through! We will need to come up with our own name that has a unique touch, or we can simply use the nameless option to generate a unique name automatically.

```

Reviewer: Sure, if you like. I was thinking that the directive to come up with a unique name got a little buried in the middle of the paragraph, so I split it hopefully to get the reader's attention.

We have officially created a Heroku app that is accessible online! We can follow the link from the `heroku create` output.

![Screenshot of the default Heroku welcome message after the initial deployment, in the browser](../assets/deployment/deployment_heroku-initial-deploy.png)

Our Heroku app doesn't have access to our Flask API code yet, so we'll see a default Heroku message.

### Verify the New Heroku Remote

Creating a Heroku app will add a new git remote to our project!

We will get a new git remote automatically named `heroku`. This git remote points exactly to where Heroku keeps and serves our code!

Confirm that we have a `heroku` remote by running this command:

```bash
$ git remote -v
```

We should see the `heroku` remote listed alongside our `origin` remote.

### Verify in the Dashboard

Creating a Heroku app will associate this app to our Heroku account.

Visit the Heroku dashboard and see your new app listed! We'll visit this dashboard whenever we need details about our Heroku app.

![Screenshot of the Heroku dashboard with the new hello-books-api app listed](../assets/deployment/deployment_heroku-dashboard-new-app.png)

## Push Code to the Heroku Remote

> We should send our project code base to our `heroku` remote.
> 
> This command will push our project's git history to a remote named `heroku`. It will push the default `main` branch to Heroku.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We should send our project codebase to our `heroku` remote.

This command will push our project's Git history to a remote named `heroku`. It will push the default `main` branch to Heroku.
```

```bash
$ git push heroku main
```

> Every time we want to push our git history to our Heroku app, we will need to push to the `heroku` remote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every time we want to push our Git history to our Heroku app, we will need to push to the `heroku` remote.
```

> 

Reviewer: add a notice about how .gitignore will affect our .env
```suggestion

### !callout-info

## Pushing to Heroku Still Ignores Files

Since we are using Git to send our code to Heroku, this means any files listed in our `.gitignore` will _not_ be sent, including our `.env` file. This means our environment variables, which include our connection strings, will not be sent to Heroku! We'll see how to tell our app where to find our database later in this lesson.

### !end-callout

```

## Create a Database in Heroku

> Now that we've created our Heroku app for the first time, we need to tell the app that we're interested in adding a postgres database to our deployed Heroku app.
> 
> This command uses the Heroku CLI to add a postgres database to the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we've created our Heroku app for the first time, we need to tell the app that we're interested in adding a Postgres database to our deployed Heroku app.

This command uses the Heroku CLI to add a Postgres database to the app.
```

```bash
$ heroku addons:create heroku-postgresql:hobby-dev
```

### Verify in the Dashboard

We can verify that our Heroku app has added a Postgres database by checking the Heroku dashboard.

> Use the Heroku dashboard to view your Heroku app. In the "Overview" tab, in the "Installed add-ons" section, we should see "Heroku Postgres."

Reviewer: revoice for we
```suggestion
We can use the Heroku dashboard to view our Heroku app. In the "Overview" tab, in the "Installed add-ons" section, we should see "Heroku Postgres."
```

![Screenshot of the Heroku dashboard at the Overview tab, showing the Heroku Postgres Add-on](../assets/deployment/deployment_overview-tab.png)

Alternatively, in the "Resources" tab, in the "Add-ons" section, we should see "Heroku Postgres."

![Screenshot of the Heroku dashboard at the Resources tab, showing the Heroku Postgres Add-on](../assets/deployment/deployment_resources-tab.png)

## Set Environment Variables in Heroku

> Our current app probably has `SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI` set as an environment variable in `.env`. The Flask code probably uses this variable with `os.environ.get("SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI")`.

Reviewer: we don't need the "probablies" since the reader has been following the previous lessons
added some extra text to make the wrap look a little nicer (due to the long code snippet)
```suggestion
Our current app sets the `SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI` environment variable using our `.env` file. Our Flask code accesses this environment variable with the code `os.environ.get("SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI")`.
```

Instead of giving Heroku our `.env` file, we need to add our environment variables to Heroku using the Heroku dashboard.

### Find the Database URL in Heroku

First, let's find the connection string that will connect to our Heroku database, instead of a local database.

When we added the Postgres database add-on above, Heroku created this connection string.

In the Heroku dashboard, in the "Settings" tab, there is a section titled "Config Vars."

![Screenshot of the Heroku dashboard at the Settings tab](../assets/deployment/deployment_heroku-app-settings.png)

> Then:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we locate this section, we should:
```

1. Click "Reveal Config Vars"
1. Find the automatically generated variable named "DATABASE_URL"
1. Copy the value of this connection string

![Screenshot of the Heroku dashboard, where the environment/config variable named DATABASE_URL is expanded in a right modal](../assets/deployment/deployment_heroku-config-var-database-url-detail.png)

### Set the Environment Variables in Heroku

> Now, let's set `SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's set the `SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI` variable.
```

In the "Config Vars" section:

1. Create a new environment variable named `SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI`
1. Set the value of this variable to the connection string we copied

![Screenshot of the Heroku dashboard at the Settings tab, showing the detail of revealed Config vars. The SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI variable is present](../assets/deployment/deployment_heroku-reveal-config-vars.png)

## Setup and Initialize the Database in Heroku

> Now that our Flask app is on Heroku and can connect to a database, we need to run some commands to initialize the database in Heroku once.
> 
> First, we'll run this command, which uses the Heroku CLI to connect to our Heroku machine, and then opens the `python3` repl on that machine:
> 
> ```bash
> $ heroku run python3
> ```
> 
> Now that we have the `python3` repl on that machine open, we can run any Python code! We can even run Python code that interacts with our Flask codebase. We should run these lines in order to create the database.
> 
> ```
> from app import db, create_app
> ```
> 
> ```
> app = create_app()
> ```
> 
> For the next line to put into the Python repl, manually add in spaces for indentation, and press enter several times to execute the line.
> 
> ```
> with app.app_context():
>     db.create_all()
> ```
> 
> Our terminal could look like this:
> 
> ![Screenshot of the terminal connecting to the Heroku app's python shell using "heroku run python3". Other commands used to initialize the database are shown](../assets/deployment/deployment_python-repl-initializing-db.png)
> 
> We can exit the `python3` repl with:
> 
> ```
> exit()
> ```

Reviewer: remove all of this and use db upgrade instead
no suggestion because code
new markdown in following comment
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Now that our Flask app is on Heroku and can connect to a database, we need to initialize the database in Heroku once.

We can run the following:

```bash
$ heroku run flask db upgrade
```

This will migrate the empty database in our remote Postgres connection to the latest schema configuration we have generated from our models.

## Verify

> Our Flask project is on a Heroku machine, running, and connected to an initialized database. Now is the time to verify if our API is accessible by web!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our Flask project is on a Heroku machine, running, and connected to an initialized database. Now is the time to verify whether our API is accessible by web!
```

### Use the Browser

We can use the browser to make `GET` requests to any endpoint defined in our project, now using our deployed Heroku URI instead of `localhost`.

> 

Reviewer: add a notice about potential routing issues
```suggestion

### !callout-warning

## Routing Configurations May Result in a `404 Not Found`

Recall that Flask routes are very picky about `/` characters. Some browsers will try to put a `/` character at the end of an address automatically. Depending on how our routes are set up, this might result in a route mismatch.

<br />

Our Flask API isn't _intended_ to be used through a web browser. It's meant to be used programmatically. It's convenient if testing through a browser works, but if it doesn't we can move on to try testing with Postman. Alternatively, we could return to the [Create and Read](../building-an-api/create-and-read.md) lesson of Building an API for tips on how to loosen our route matching.

### !end-callout

```

Author: Oh my goodness I completely forgot this was an issue, except when I did local development and my browser's history defaulted to `localhost:5000/books/` and I had to develop on an incognito window 😱 

Nitpicking:

```suggestion

### !callout-warning
## Routing Configurations May Result in a `404 Not Found`
Recall that Flask routes are very picky about `/` characters. Some browsers will try to put a `/` character at the end of an address automatically. Depending on how our routes are set up, this might result in a route mismatch.
<br />
Our Flask API isn't _intended_ to be used through a web browser. It's meant to be used programmatically. It's convenient if testing through a browser works, but if it doesn't we can move on to try testing with Postman.
### !end-callout

```

You KNOW I want to avoid referring to another lesson in another topic if possible 😆 Would you argue that the sentence is a make-or-break kinda deal for usefulness?

...Lastly, since this doesn't only apply to localhost, but also `https://your-app-name.herokuapp.com/books/`, should this go after the screenshot, right before the "No Book Data" callout?

Reviewer: From a previous discussion we had I thought that linking to another topic was ok, since Learn validates links within the files and will report broken links if the resource gets moved.

If it's the implied ordering, we could say to refer to rather than to return to.

They COULD just move on to postman testing. It's not the end of the worlD. I mean, we don't NEED to remind them of where we told them how to avoid this issue, but I can't think of a good reason not to.

Reviewer: Regarding placement, I was largely driven by my aversion to stacked callouts. 😂   I'm not wedded to its present location.

> Instead of `localhost:5000/books`, we could visit `https://your-app-name.herokuapp.com/books`, where `your-app-name` is the name of your Heroku app.

Reviewer: we could, but we won't? could has a muddier meaning than can here
your → our
```suggestion
Instead of `localhost:5000/books`, we can visit `https://your-app-name.herokuapp.com/books`, where `your-app-name` is the name of our Heroku app.
```

![Screenshot of the browser open to the deployed API, showing a response of an empty JSON array](../assets/deployment/deployment_deployed-books.png)

### !callout-info

## No Book Data

> Our apps have zero books listed when we go to `/books`, even though our app is deployed correctly and connected to our Postgres database correctly.

Reviewer: we talking about one app
```suggestion
Our app has zero books listed when we go to `/books`, even though our app is deployed correctly and connected to our Postgres database correctly.

<br />

```

<details>

<summary>Why are there no books listed?</summary>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<br />

```

> Recall that our deployed app is connected to a Postgres database that we created a few steps ago! We have not added any book data to our Heroku database. Even if our local database is full of books, our Heroku app's connection string to the database points at the Heroku database. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recall that our deployed app is connected to a Postgres database that we created a few steps ago! We have not added any book data to our Heroku database. Even if our local database is full of books, our Heroku app's database connection string points at the Heroku database. 
```

</details>

### !end-callout

As a convenient shortcut, the Heroku CLI gives us this command to automatically open our Heroku app in the browser:

```bash
$ heroku open
```

This command needs to be run inside of our project folder.

### Use Postman

We can use Postman to make and verify all sorts of HTTP requests to our API!

### Use Heroku Logs

> During local development on our own machines, when we ran `$ flask run`, the server's logs were output into our terminal. We could see the details about every HTTP request our server receives and every HTTP response it gives. We could also output for any errors.
> 
> We can access the server logs of our Heroku app from the Heroku dashboard by finding the "More" menu and finding "View logs."

Reviewer: we are recollecting what we could do, so stick with past
```suggestion
During local development on our own machines, when we ran `$ flask run`, the server's logs were output into our terminal. We could see the details about every HTTP request our server received and every HTTP response it returned. We could also see output for any errors.

We can access the server logs of our Heroku app from the Heroku dashboard by finding the "More" menu and selecting "View logs."
```

![Screenshot of the Heroku dashboard, focusing on the "More" menu, which lists the option to View logs](../assets/deployment/deployment_heroku-view-logs-menu.png)

It reports the HTTP requests, responses, and errors that our Heroku app encounters.

![Screenshot of the Heroku logs, showing examples of different HTTP requests and responses](../assets/deployment/deployment_heroku-logs.png)

Alternatively, we can access the server logs using the Heroku CLI and running:

```bash
$ heroku logs
```

If we want to see the logs output in real time, we can run:

```bash
$ heroku logs --tail
```

> This option is useful when we want to recreate an error and see what server logs are most relevant.

Reviewer: clarify why we're recreating an error
```suggestion
This option is useful when we are troubleshooting an issue. If we can recreate the error, we'll be able to see the server log information related to the error just as if we were running the application locally.
```

<!-- Question 1 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !challenge
* type: checkbox
* id: bDUwQW
* title: Deploying to Heroku
##### !question

Consider the steps for doing the initial deploy to Heroku.

Check off all the topics that we've briefly touched on so far.

##### !end-question
##### !options

* Create a Heroku account and download the Heroku CLI
* Create a Procfile for our Flask project
* Committed the Procfile
* Create a Heroku app
* Push code to the `heroku` remote
* Added the Postgres add-on to our Heroku app using the Heroku CLI
* Set the environment variable for our database in Heroku

> * Initialized the database by using `$ heroku run python3`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Initialized the database by using `$ heroku run flask db upgrade`
```

##### !end-options
##### !answer

* Create a Heroku account and download the Heroku CLI
* Create a Procfile for our Flask project
* Committed the Procfile
* Create a Heroku app
* Push code to the `heroku` remote
* Added the Postgres add-on to our Heroku app using the Heroku CLI
* Set the environment variable for our database in Heroku

> * Initialized the database by using `$ heroku run python3`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Initialized the database by using `$ heroku run flask db upgrade`
```

##### !end-answer
### !end-challenge
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

## Updating the Heroku Remote Workflow

> When we practice _continuous deployment_, we must adopt a practice of regularly updating the git history of our Heroku app.
> 
> We could summarize our local development workflow like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we practice _continuous deployment_, we must adopt the practice of regularly updating the Git history of our Heroku app.

We can summarize our local development workflow like this:
```

> 1. Activate our virtual environment
> 1. Pull down any new commits from git
> 1. Run tests
> 1. Write code
> 1. Make git commits
> 1. Push our git history to the `origin` remote, which is our repo on GitHub
> 1. **Push our git history to the `heroku` remote**, which is our Heroku app
> 1. Verify our deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Activate our virtual environment
1. Pull down any new commits from Git
1. Run tests
1. Write code
1. Make Git commits
1. Push our Git history to the `origin` remote, which is our repo on GitHub
1. **Push our Git history to the `heroku` remote**, which is our Heroku app
1. Verify our deployment
```

## General Deployment Tools

We can continue to use the browser and Postman to create HTTP requests and check their HTTP responses!

### Heroku Tools in the Dashboard

The Heroku dashboard includes:

- Access to the Heroku logs
- Access to the Heroku console (which acts as a terminal on our Heroku machine)
- Management of environment variables
- Management of collaborators on this Heroku app
- History of "Latest Activity," which will show the timeline of recent deployments

### Command-Line Tools

The following are great Heroku CLI commands to keep handy:

> | Command              | Explanation                                                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer: improve formatting
```suggestion
| <div style="min-width:200px;">Command</div>              | Explanation                                                                                                                                                         |
```

| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `heroku logs --tail` | Turns the current terminal window into tailing the Heroku logs, and get real-time updates                                                                           |

Reviewer: "turns the window into" sounds like a roundabout way of saying "starts" 😂 
```suggestion
| `heroku logs --tail` | Starts tailing the Heroku logs in the current terminal window, displaying real-time updates                                                                           |
```

| `heroku run python3` | Runs the `python3` repl on the Heroku machine running our app                                                                                                       |

> | `heroku pg:psql`     | Runs the `psql` shell on the Heroku machine running our app. We can use this to execute `psql` commands, and check, add, update, delete the data that our app uses. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `heroku pg:psql`     | Runs the `psql` CLI on the Heroku machine running our app. We can use this to execute `psql` commands, and check, add, update, or delete the data that our app uses. |
```

## General Heroku Debugging Strategies

Sometimes, after deployment, our deployed app doesn't behave as expected. This could be a bug, and it could also be our web server catching an exception.

Our deployed apps can encounter problems ranging from:

- Problems with our own Flask code, such as broken syntax or buggy features
- Our database not being connected or initialized properly
- Our Heroku machine not downloading and installing the correct dependencies
- Heroku.com itself being down, or improper use of Heroku tools

In those situations, here is a starting point for debugging and determining what is causing the deployment error:

> | Debugging Action                          | Details                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer: improve formatting
```suggestion
| <div style="min-width:200px;">Debugging Action</div>                          | Details                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
```

| ----------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Check the logs                            | The logs will show error messages that the web server outputs. These messages could share details such as Python `NameError`s, database connection errors, problems with running the Flask app, problems with downloading the right packages, etc. |
| See if you can recreate it locally        | Attempt to recreate the problem locally, by running `$ flask run` on your own local machine. Error messages may be more detailed on our local machine. Also, concluding that you're **unable to recreate the issue** is valuable in itself!        |

> | Check the status of the git history       | Confirm that the remote git history is up-to-date. Check that working code has been recently pushed to the `heroku` remote.                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Check the status of the Git history       | Confirm that the remote Git history is up-to-date. Check that working code has been recently pushed to the `heroku` remote.                                                                                                                        |
```

| Internet research!                        | Heroku has a large community of support, and a lot of documentation on deploying Flask apps and using Postgres databases. Be sure to use the Internet and to rubber duck with others.                                                              |
| Take notes of each debugging attempt      | It can be challenging to remember what you've tried on the Heroku machine. Write down and record all of the ways you've attempted to fix the problem.                                                                                              |

> | Rubber-duck, and post questions on Slack! | Debugging deployment usually depends on context. Rubber-duck and connect with folks who are deploying similar projects to you!                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Rubber duck, and post questions on Slack! | Debugging deployment usually depends on context. Rubber duck and connect with folks who are deploying similar projects to you!                                                                                                                     |
```

## Push Code to the Heroku Remote

We should send our project codebase to our `heroku` remote.

This command will push our project's Git history to a remote named `heroku`. It will push the default `main` branch to Heroku.

```bash
$ git push heroku main
```

Every time we want to push our Git history to our Heroku app, we will need to push to the `heroku` remote.

### !callout-info

## Pushing to Heroku Still Ignores Files

Since we are using Git to send our code to Heroku, this means any files listed in our `.gitignore` will _not_ be sent, including our `.env` file. This means our environment variables, which include our connection strings, will not be sent to Heroku! We'll see how to tell our app where to find our database later in this lesson.

### !end-callout

## Create a Database in Heroku

Now that we've created our Heroku app for the first time, we need to tell the app that we're interested in adding a Postgres database to our deployed Heroku app.

This command uses the Heroku CLI to add a Postgres database to the app.

```bash
$ heroku addons:create heroku-postgresql:hobby-dev
```

### Verify in the Dashboard

> We can verify that our Heroku app has added a Postgres database by checking the Heroku dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can verify that our Heroku app has added a Postgres database by checking the [Heroku dashboard](https://dashboard.heroku.com/).
```
